📜Create texture atlas loading tutorial (#27)
KinsonDigital/VelaptorDocs: docs/tutorials/guides/rendering-with-texture-atlas.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Rendering With An Atlas Texture

Another way to render textures is by using an atlas texture. This guide is a little more
in-depth and longer than the previous guides.  Stick with it though, it will be worth it!!

:::info
Want more detail about what an atlas texture is? Refer to the links below:
1. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texture_atlas)
2. [Game Dev Tuts Plus](https://gamedevelopment.tutsplus.com/articles/using-texture-atlas-in-order-to-optimize-your-game--cms-26783)
3. [Examples](https://www.pinterest.com/pin/676877018967605282/)
:::

An atlas texture is a large image with multiple sub-images packed into a single image.  With this single image, you use another file
of a particular format such as JSON or XML, that describes the location, size, and other kinds of meta-data for each image in the atlas texture.

:::info

> If you are an experienced developer, you know what _**JSON**_ is.  But for the people

Reviewer: Gramamar.  Remove "But"
```suggestion
If you are an experienced developer, you know what _**JSON**_ is.  For the people
```

who are learning and new to development, click [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iiADhChRriM)
for a great 10-minute video on what JSON is.
:::

When [rendering textures](./rendering-textures) the standard way, you render the entire texture.

> Though there is nothing wrong with rendering whole textures one at a time, there are some downsides and upsides.  In the end, it all depends on what you are trying to accomplish.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
Though there is nothing wrong with rendering whole textures one at a time, there are pros and cons.  In the end, it all depends on what you are trying to accomplish.
```

With an atlas texture, you can pack all of the sequences of animation into the atlas.  This is usually loaded by a library that loads the atlas texture
and the associated meta-data.  At this point, it is very easy to automate the process of switching between textures to run an animation.  Velaptor comes with loading
atlas textures and their associated meta-data built in.

**Benefits:**

> - **Reduces draw calls:** Reduces the number of times Velaptor needs to send data to the GPU and reduces the number of draw calls. This is because instead of sending data and making draw calls for each individual texture, you only have to for a single atlas texture.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
- **Reduces draw calls:** Reduces the number of times Velaptor needs to send data to the GPU and reduces the number of draw calls. Instead of sending data and making draw calls for each individual texture, you only have to for a single atlas texture.
```

- **Improved performance:** Reduces draw calls to improve the performance of your game.

> - **Easier management:** Easier to manage one large texture than many small ones, especially when it comes to loading and unloading textures and coordinating the draw calls between textures.  This results in less code.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
- - **Easier management:** Easier to manage one large texture than many small ones, especially when it comes to loading and unloading textures and coordinating the draw calls between textures.  The result is less code.
```

> - **Smoother Animations:** Makes animations smoother by reducing the amount of time your game spends loading and unloading textures..

Reviewer: Remove extra . at the end
```suggestion
- **Smoother Animations:** Makes animations smoother by reducing the amount of time your game spends loading and unloading textures.
```

- **Reduced memory usage:** Reduces the amount of memory your games use since you only need to load one large texture instead of many smaller ones.

> It all depends on your goals.  All games do a mix between whole texture and atlas texture rendering.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
It all depends on your goals.  All games use a combination of whole texture and atlas texture rendering.
```

> Various tools out there give you the ability to easily create atlas textures and meta-data.  An example of some tools that do this would be [Texture Packer](https://www.codeandweb.com/texturepacker)

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
There are various tools that give you the ability to easily create atlas textures and meta-data.  A couple examples are: [Texture Packer](https://www.codeandweb.com/texturepacker)
```

and [Spine](https://esotericsoftware.com/).

:::note
Velaptor does not currently have a tool to build these atlas texture images with the associated meta-data.
Plans are in the works to add _**Texture Packer**_ integration.  Though, it is not that difficult to write your
code to load the _**Texture Packer**_ JSON data for use.
:::

:::tip

> Do not overstress about whole vs atlas texture rendering.  This comes with practice and depends on your needs.

Reviewer: Grammar. Use a period after vs 
```suggestion
Do not overstress about whole vs. atlas texture rendering.  This comes with practice and depends on your needs.
```

:::

### <span class="color-step">Step 2: Get atlas content</span>

Download the atlas texture files below:
- Go <a target="\_blank" href="https://github.com/KinsonDigital/VelaptorTutorials/blob/master/AtlasTextures/Content/Atlas/atlas.png">here</a> to download the <b><i>atlas.png</i></b> file.
- Go <a target="\_blank" href="https://github.com/KinsonDigital/VelaptorTutorials/blob/master/AtlasTextures/Content/Atlas/atlas.json">here</a> to download the <b><i>atlas.json</i></b> file.

Click the GitHub download button shown below to download the file
<img style={{width: '20%'}} src={require('@site/static/img/tutorials/guides/rendering-with-texture-atlas/github-download-btn.jpg').default}/>

### <span class="color-step">Step 3: Add content to project</span>

Add the downloaded atlas texture and meta-data JSON file to the _**Content/Atlas/**_ directory in the project.
:::note
For more info, refer to the [Adding Content](./adding-content) guide.
:::

Both files should be in the same directory and besides the extension, should have the same name.
The two files you downloaded should be named _**atlas.png**_ and _**atlas.json**_.

:::note

> You can name the files whatever you want, but the file names exclude the extension must match.

Reviewer: Grammar
```suggestion
You can name the files whatever you want, but the file names, excluding the extensions, must match.
```

#### <span class="color-sub-step">Step 5.1: Create atlas data fields</span>

```csharp
public class Game: Window
{
	private ITexture? atlasTexture;
	private AtlasSubTextureData[]? subTextureData;
	...
}
```

#### <span class="color-sub-step">Step 5.2: Load atlas data</span>

Next, let's create an `OnLoad()` method override and add code to the method to load the atlas data.

```csharp
protected override void OnLoad()
{
	// Loads the atlas.png and atlas.json file
	var atlasData = ContentLoader.LoadAtlas("atlas");

	this.atlasTexture = atlasData.Texture;
	this.subTextureData = atlasData.GetFrames("flame");

	base.OnLoad();
}
```
The `atlasData` variable will contain the loaded texture and the meta-data for the texture.
We can use this data to make decisions on animation, positioning and more.

:::note
If you noticed, all you have to provide is the _**name**_ of the atlas.  
No file extensions are required and no need to load the _**.png**_ and _**.json**_ files separately!!
:::

:::info
Meta-data format

<details><summary>Expand me for more info!!</summary>

Let's go over the JSON data that is contained in the meta-data file.

> _**$type**_: This is the type of the object.  This is used by the JSON serializer to know what type of object to create.  

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
_**$type**_: This is the type of the object that is used by the JSON serializer to know what type of object to create.  
```

There is no need to worry about this key.  Do not change it and you will be fine.

_**Bounds**_: This is the x, y, width, and height of the sub-texture in the atlas.  This is used to determine where the sub-texture is located in the atlas.  
These are what you will use during the rendering process to render the frame of the animation.

_**FrameIndex**_: This is the frame number of an animation.  If the frame number is -1, then this is not part of an animation.  
This is what you will use to keep track of which frame of animation you want to render.

_**Name**_: This is the name of the sub-texture.  This is what you will use to determine which group of frames animation you want to load.
This is what you use when calling the `GetFrames()` method.  If you wanted to load the meta-data for the _**ship**_

> sub-texture, you would call `GetFrames("ship")` and you would only get an array with a single item.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
_**Name**_: This is the name of the sub-texture and is what you will use in determining which group of frames animation you want to load and when calling the `GetFrames()` method.  If you wanted to load the meta-data for the _**ship**_
sub-texture, you would call `GetFrames("ship")` and you would only get an array with a single item.
```

	"FrameIndex": 8, // The frame number of an animation
	"Name": "flame" // The name of the sub-texture
},
{
	"$type": "Velaptor.Graphics.AtlasSubTextureData, Velaptor",
	"Bounds": "428, 850, 361, 948",
	"FrameIndex": 9,
	"Name": "flame"
},
{
	"$type": "Velaptor.Graphics.AtlasSubTextureData, Velaptor",
	"Bounds": "0, 76, 75, 75",
	"FrameIndex": -1, // -1 means that this is not part of an animation
	"Name": "ship"
}
```
</details>
:::

### <span class="color-step">Step 6: Let's animate</span>

Now that we have loaded the atlas data, let's add some code to the `OnUpdate()` method to animate the sub-textures.

#### <span class="color-sub-step">Step 6.1: Tracking time</span>

For us to run an animation, we need to keep track of how much time has passed.
Add the following fields to the `Game` class.

```csharp
public class Game : Window
{
	...
	private float elapsedMs; // The total milliseconds that have passed
	private int currentFrame; // The current frame of the animation
	private bool isFullSize; // Whether or not the flame has grown to full size
	...
}
```

:::info
Why do we need to do this?
<details><summary>Expand me for more info!!</summary>

> Think of a flip book.  If you were to flip through the pages of a flip book, you would see the animation.

Reviewer: Do people know what a flip book is anymore?  LOL!

Author: I created a link to a great video about flipbooks with millions of views.  😉

The faster you flip through the pages, the faster the animation will appear.  The slower you flip
through the pages, the slower the animation will appear.  The same concept applies to animations in games.
<br/>
<br/>
The problem with software is that it runs each frame very fast.  If we changed the frames of the

> animation as fast as the game would run, the animation be too fast.  We need to slow down the

Reviewer: Grammar
```suggestion
animation as fast as the game would run, the animation would move too fast.  We need to slow down the
```

> animation to the desired speed so that it appears to be running smoothly.

Reviewer: Reword? Not exactly sure...
```suggestion
animation to the desired speed so that it runs smoothly.
```

<br/>
<br/>
How fast you want to run your animation is up to you.  You can make it run as fast

> as you want or as slow as you want.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
How fast you want to run your animation is up to you.  You can make it run as fast or as slow as you want.
```

	if (this.elapsedMs >= 124)
	{
		// If the current frame is one of the frames after
		// the flame has grown to full size.
		if (this.currentFrame >= 8)
		{
			this.isFullSize = true;
		}

		// Get the starting frame index based on if the flame has
		// grown to full size or not.
		var startFrame = this.isFullSize ? 8 : 0;

		// If the last frame has been reached, reset to the starting frame
		this.currentFrame = this.currentFrame >= this.subTextureData.Length - 1
			? startFrame
			: this.currentFrame + 1;

		// Reset the elapsed time so we can wait for another
		// 124ms before moving to the next frame
		this.elapsedMs = 0;
	}

	base.OnUpdate(frameTime);
}
```

This code will check if 124ms has passed.  If it has, then it will move to the next frame of
the animation.  If the last frame has been reached, then it will reset to the first frame.
Now we have our flip book!!

The `startFrame` is the frame that the animation will start at.  If the flame has grown to full size,
then the animation will start at the 8th frame.  If the flame has not grown to full size, then the
flame is still growing as the animation is playing.  After the flame has grown to full size, the only

> frames that will be rendered are frames 8 to 15.

Reviewer: Reword/grammar.  
```suggestion
The `startFrame` is the frame where the animation starts, which will be either 0 or 8.  If the flame has not grown to full size,
frames 0-7 will be used.  If the flame has grown to full size, frames 8-15 will be used.
```

:::tip
If you want to calculate how many milliseconds it takes for a particular frame rate, just take
the value 1000 and divide it by the desired frame rate.

_**Formula:**_ ms/sec <span style={{fontSize: '14pt', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>÷</span> fps = ms/frame.

For example, 1000 <span style={{fontSize: '14pt', fontWeight: 'bold'}}>÷</span> 60 = 16.66ms.  This means if you want to run something at 60fps, you would need to
to make something happen every 16ms to obtain that frame rate.
:::

:::info
What is FPS?

<details><summary>Expand me for more info!!</summary>

FPS stands for frames per second.  This is the number of frames that are rendered per second.
The game loop of a game consists of the two most important methods: `OnUpdate()` and `OnRender()`.
The `OnUpdate()` and `OnRender()` methods are called once per frame.  The speed (or frequency) at
which these methods are called is what determines the FPS of the game.  The faster the methods run,

> the higher the FPS.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
FPS stands for frames per second, which, as the name implies, is the number of frames that are rendered per second.
The game loop consists of the two most important methods: `OnUpdate()` and `OnRender()`.
The `OnUpdate()` and `OnRender()` methods are called once per frame.  The speed (or frequency) at
which these methods are called is what determines the FPS of the game.  The faster the methods run,
the higher the FPS.
```

<br/>
<br/>

> To calculate the FPS, you would divide the number of frames rendered by the number of seconds that

Reviewer: Grammar
```suggestion
To calculate the FPS, divide the number of frames rendered by the number of seconds that
```

	IRenderer.End();

	base.OnDraw(frameTime);
}
```

Here we are using the location data from the frame meta-data to know where in the atlas
the current frame or sub-texture is located.  We then render only that sub-texture to the screen.

The `srcRect` and `destRect` variables are what tell Velaptor the _**section**_ of the atlas to render.

The 

### <span class="color-step">Step 8: Run It</span>

Run the game and see the results!  You should see a small window with a pretty blue flame
animating in the center of the window as shown below.

:::note
The animation will be much smoother than what is shown here.
:::

![Flame Animation](@site/static/img/tutorials/guides/rendering-with-texture-atlas/flame.gif)

### <span class="color-step">Step 9: Bonus</span>

You do not have to do this step of course, but what is game development without a little
bit of extra fun?  Let's improve the randomness of the flame animation.

#### <span class="color-sub-step">Step 9.1: Add more fields</span>

Add two more class fields to the `Game` class.  These fields will keep track of the 
flame sub-texture should be flipped horizontally and randomly choose which horizontal

> orientation the texture should be flipped.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
Add two more class fields to the `Game` class.  The `random` field will be used to randomly choose between horizontal or non-horizontal orientation.  The `horizontalLayout` field will be the layout setting at the time of rendering.
```

```csharp
public class Game: Window
{
	...
	private readonly Random random = new (); // Chooses random numbers
    private RenderEffects horizontalLayout; // The horizontal orientation to render flame
	...
}
```

#### <span class="color-sub-step">Step 9.2: Add flip behavior</span>

Add the following code to randomly choose if the flame should be flipped horizontally to the
bottom of the `if` block.  This will choose a number between the values 0 and 1 and if 0,
the flame will be flipped horizontally.  If 1, the flame will not be flipped horizontally.

> This is synonymous with flipping a coin.

Reviewer: Reword
```suggestion
Add the following code to randomly choose whether or not the flame should be flipped horizontally to the
bottom of the `if` block.  This will choose a number between the values 0 and 1. If 0 is chosen,
the flame will be flipped horizontally.  If 1 is chosen, the flame will not be flipped horizontally.

This is synonymous with flipping a coin.
```
